The extinction of the Catarina pupfish Megupsilon
aporus and the implications for the conservation of
freshwater fish in Mexico


Abstract Extinctions are occurring at an unprecedented
rate as a consequence of human activities. Vertebrates con-
stitute the best-known group of animals, and thus the group
for which there are more accurate estimates of extinctions.
Among them, freshwater fishes are particularly threatened
and many species are declining. Here we report the extinc-
tion of an endemic freshwater fish of Mexico, the Catarina
pupfish Megupsilon aporus, the sole species of the genus
Megupsilon. We present a synopsis of the discovery and de-
scription of the species, the threats to, and degradation of, its
habitat, and the efforts to maintain the species in captivity
before it became extinct. The loss of the Catarina
pupfish has evolutionary and ecological implications, and
highlights the crisis of freshwater fish extinctions. It is a
warning of the likely fate of more than  freshwater fish
species threatened with extinction in Mexico. To save these
species, the country urgently needs a national strategy to ar-
ticulate a bold conservation effort, with better policies on
ecosystem management and water use.
Keywords Catarina pupfish, conservation, Cyprinodontidae,
extinction, fish, Megupsilon aporus, Mexico
Introduction
B iodiversity loss is one of the most severe environmental
problems, with thousands of species having gone ex-
tinct since the start of the 20th century and hundreds of
thousands of populations being lost as a result of human ac-
tivities. The rate of extinction of vertebrate species in this 
period has been up to  times faster
than in the last  million years (Ceballos et al., ).
Extinctions of birds and mammals have been documented
more thoroughly than extinctions of fishes and inverte-
brates, which have often been overlooked (e.g. Dirzo et al.,
; Régnier et al., ). Since the start of the st century it
has become clear that population depletion and extinction
of both freshwater and marine fishes is a severe and wide-
spread problem (e.g. Ricciardi & Rasmussen, ; Myers
& Worm, ; Olden et al., ; Burkhead, ).
Extinction of freshwater fishes has been relatively well
documented in North America (e.g. Miller et al., ;
Burkhead, ). A compilation of the conservation status
of freshwater fishes in Mexico has revealed that  species
have become extinct in the wild or have been extirpated
from the country, and .  (% of all species in
Mexico) are facing extinction (IUCN, ; Ceballos et al.,
b; Table ).
While compiling these data we found that the Catarina
pupfish Megupsilon aporus is the most recently extinct en-
demic freshwater fish in Mexico. This species, which be-
longs to the Cyprinodontidae and is one of the smallest
fishes in North America, was lost as a result of desiccation
of the only freshwater spring it inhabited, in El Potosi,
Galeana, Nuevo León (Miller et al., ; Bennett &
Conway, ). Unfortunately, this is not an isolated case.
Major threats to freshwater fishes in particular and fresh-
water biodiversity in general have been grouped into five
categories: overexploitation of water resources, water pollu-
tion, flow modification, destruction or degradation of habi-
tat, and invasive species (Silk & Ciruna, ; Dudgeon
et al., ). Inland waters in Mexico have experienced
these threats, and currently % of main rivers are polluted,
. , dams have modified their flow and .  invasive
species inhabit inland waters (Carabias & Landa, ;
Domínguez-Domínguez et al., ; CONAGUA, ).
The effect of these threats on freshwater fishes depends
on the particular environmental conditions, the type and
amount of pressure exerted by human activities, and the
distribution range of species. For instance, species with re-
stricted distributions, such as the Cuatro Cienegas platyfish
Xiphophorus gordoni, which inhabits desert springs, and the
Yucatan tetra Astyanax altior, endemic to cenotes in the
Yucatan Peninsula, are more imperilled than those with a
wide distribution (Jelks et al., ; Contreras-MacBeath
et al., ). Meanwhile, habitats in northern Mexico with
major water supply problems as a result of semi-arid and
arid conditions are at higher risk of desiccation than
aquatic systems in south-east Mexico (Contreras-Balderas
& Lozano-Vilano, ; Carabias & Landa, ; Ceballos
A RCADIO VALDÉS G ONZÁLEZ and MA . ELENA Á NGELES VILLEDA Universidad
Autónoma de Nuevo León, Nuevo León, Mexico
LOURDES MARTÍNEZ ESTÉVEZ (Corresponding author) Department of Ecology and
Evolutionary Biology, University of California, 115 McAllister Way, Santa Cruz,
California 95060, USA. E-mail mmarti72@ucsc.edu
G ERARDO C EBALLOS Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico City,
Mexico
Received  September . Revision requested  November .
Accepted  April . First published online  December .
Oryx, 2020, 54(2), 154–160 © 2018 Fauna & Flora International doi:10.1017/S003060531800056X
https://doi.org/10.1017/S003060531800056X Published online by Cambridge University Press
et al., a,b). Watershed management in Mexico therefore
requires addressing local conservation issues with a regional
perspective, to ensure the maintenance of these habitats and
their fish populations in the long term (Stiassny & Bianco,
; Ceballos et al., b).
The Catarina pupfish (Plate ) was discovered in . It
was described in  as the only species of the genus
Megupsilon, and only  years after its scientific discovery
it became extinct in the wild. We present a historical synop-
sis of the species and the causes of its decline, and discuss the
implications of the extinction process for the conservation
of freshwater fish diversity in Mexico.
The discovery and description of a new species
Available information on the biology and ecology of the
Catarina pupfish is scarce but examination of peer-reviewed
and grey literature provided us with sufficient details to docu-
ment the sequence of events and factors that led to the
species’ decline (Miller & Walters, ; Contreras-Balderas
& Lozano-Vilano, a,b; Contreras-Balderas et al., ;
Echelle et al., ; Jelks, et al., ; Bennett & Conway,
; Burkhead, ; Liu & Echelle, ).
The first recorded individual of the Catarina pupfish was
collected from the wild by R.R. Miller and H.L. Huddle in
, but the species was not described until  (Miller &
Walters, ). Megupsilon aporus is an endemic Mexican
species (Miller, ). The generic name and species were
assigned based on two particular characters: Megupsilon in
reference to the huge Y chromosome in males, and aporus in
reference to the lack of pores in the cephalic sensory system
(Miller & Walters, ). Although the species is related to
Cyprinodon, the characters that classified it as a separate spe-
cies, along with those previously mentioned, were a different
number of chromosomes between males () and females
(), the presence of side scales between the dorsal and
anal fins, the lack of a black terminal border in the anal
fin of nuptial males, the presence of an anal fin as large as
the dorsal fin in females, and particular behavioural traits
(see below; Uyeno & Miller, ; Miller & Walters, ).
The small Catarina pupfish exhibited sexual dimorph-
ism. Males were smaller ( mm in length) than females
( mm; Miller & Walters, ). Adult males were steel
blue on the back and sides of the body, with a golden
sheen in the caudal peduncle, the caudal fin was orange,
and a there was a vertical black bar above and below the
pupil on the eyes. Adult females had a golden olivaceous col-
ouration over the body (Miller & Walters, ).
Habitat
The Catarina pupfish was endemic to a freshwater spring at
El Potosi, on the west side of Sierra Madre Oriental, and with-
in the Sandia basin, Galeana, Nuevo León, Mexico (°′N
°′W; Fig. ). This location, at , m, was also home to
the Potosi pupfish Cyprinodon alvarezi and the fresh-
water crayfish Cambarellus alvarezi (Rodríguez-Almaraz &
Campos, ), both also endemic to this small spring. The
spring was a remnant of a larger water body in an endorheic
basin known as La Hediondilla (Miller & Walters, ). It is
believed that during the Pleistocene the larger lake was con-
nected with the Rio Conchos basin and Rio Bravo tributaries
in the north.
Habitat descriptions by Miller & Walters () men-
tioned the presence of a main pond (c.  ha) with an inner
stream and some secondary ponds. Clear water was present
year-round, with depths of .– m (Miller & Walters,
). These conditions remained until the early s
(Plate ; Rodriguez-Almaraz & Campos, ). The vegeta-
tion in the area included pennywort Hydrocotyle sp.,
herbaceous flowering plants Nasturtium sp., water
primrose Lugwigia sp., hornwort Ceratophyllum demersum,
TABLE 1 Freshwater fish species that are extinct in the wild or
extirpated in Mexico (Ceballos et al., b).
Species Distribution Status
Cyprinodon alvarezi Mexico, endemic Extinct in the wild
Cyprinodon longidorsalis Mexico, endemic Extinct in the wild
Cyprinodon veronicae Mexico, endemic Extinct in the wild
Skiffia francesae Mexico, endemic Extinct in the wild
Xyrauchen texanus North America Extirpated
Gila elegans North America Extirpated
Hybognathus amarus North America Extirpated
Notropis simus North America Extirpated
Ptychocheilus lucius North America Extirpated
Rhinichthys osculus North America Extirpated
PLATE 1 The Catarina pupfish Megupsilon aporus was a
freshwater fish endemic to Mexico; it is now extinct: (a) male,
(b) female. Photograph by Daniel Garza Tobón.
Extinction of the Catarina pupfish 155
Oryx, 2020, 54(2), 154–160 © 2018 Fauna & Flora International doi:10.1017/S003060531800056X
https://doi.org/10.1017/S003060531800056X Published online by Cambridge University Press
pondweed Potamogeton sp., duckweed Lemna sp., green
algae, and grasses restricted to shallow areas (Miller &
Walters, ; Guzmán-Cedillo, ).
Natural history and ecology
Megupsilon aporus was considered to be part of a relict fauna
isolated from the Rio Grande system more than  million
years ago (Echelle et al., ). It diverged from the common
Cyprinodon ancestor to constitute a monotypic genus in the
late Miocene (Echelle et al., ). Following its discovery,
several expeditions were made to gather information on
the species and its habitat (Table ). On an expedition in
 Contreras-Balderas and Lozano-Vilano found that the
flow in the pond was constant year-round and that aquatic
vegetation was abundant. They also described the abundance
of M. aporus; c. , individuals were found in pockets
of the aquatic vegetation mat, which was mainly composed
of Ceratophyllum sp. (Contreras-Balderas & Lozano-Vilano,
a). By , individuals of largemouth bass Micropterus
salmoides were collected in El Potosi and the abundance of
Megupsilon was significantly lower. There is no information
regarding the introduction of this exotic fish but its presence
was one of the causes of the decline of the Catarina pupfish,
although not the most pervasive (Contreras-Balderas &
Lozano-Vilano, a; see below).
The Catarina pupfish was oviparous, with no breeding
territoriality. The species presented two characteristic beha-
viours: opercular rotation and jaw-nudging during court-
ship (Liu & Echelle, ). Courtship and mating took a
unique form, with no aggressive behaviour; instead attrac-
tive movements were performed to bring about successful
spawning. Mating was usually carried out at dawn or dusk
and there was no cannibalistic egg consumption nor aggres-
sion of any kind among males and females (V. González,
pers. comm.).
According to Miller & Walters (), M. aporus coex-
isted with the Potosi pupfish via niche partitioning. The
Catarina pupfish preferred shallow areas close to the surface,
whereas the Potosi pupfish occurred predominantly in the
deep waters of the spring. The two species had different diet-
ary preferences; the Catarina pupfish was carnivorous, feed-
ing mainly on insect larvae and chironomids, whereas the
Potosi pupfish fed mainly on algae.
Habitat degradation
The habitat, described by Miller & Walters (), remained
in good condition for more than  years (Rodríguez-Almaraz
& Campos, ). During – the area covered by the
spring contracted and expanded as a result of water extraction
for agriculture and subsequent recovery during the wet sea-
son. However, in  the spring was reduced to % of its
former size as a result of intensified groundwater pumping.
By  only a shallow irrigation ditch and small tributaries
F IG. 1 Location of El Potosi spring in Nuevo León, Mexico,
which is the only known habitat of the Catarina pupfish
Megupsilon aporus.
PLATE 2 Habitat degradation and desiccation of the El Potosi
spring in Nuevo León, Mexico (Fig. ). (a) The spring in 
(photograph from Miller et al., ), and (b) in 
(photograph by María Elena Ángeles Villeda).
156 A. Valdés González et al.
Oryx, 2020, 54(2), 154–160 © 2018 Fauna & Flora International doi:10.1017/S003060531800056X
https://doi.org/10.1017/S003060531800056X Published online by Cambridge University Press
remained (Contreras-Balderas & Lozano-Vilano, a;
Plate ).
Overexploitation of water was the main cause of the de-
cline of M. aporus (Contreras-Balderas & Lozano-Vilano,
a). By  more than  wells of .  m depth had
been dug for irrigation of corn and potato fields in El
Potosi and Sandia Valleys, causing the desiccation of springs
and creeks in the region. As a result, aquatic species, includ-
ing the fishes Cyprinodon veronicae, Cyprinodon longidorsa-
lis, Cyprinodon ceciliae and Cyprinodon inmemoriam
became locally extinct (Contreras-Balderas, ). The
Catarina pupfish was considered to be extinct in the wild
by , and in  El Potosi spring was completely dry
(Tveteraas, ; Contreras-Balderas & Lozano-Vilano,
b).
Given the grave situation, a strategic plan to protect the
area was presented by the first Mexican fish recovery team,
which comprised researchers from Universidad Autonoma
de Nuevo León. However, the proposal was not adopted or
enforced (Contreras-Balderas, ).
In the early s natural coal deposits in the area started
burning as a result of the collapse and subsidence of sedi-
ments, causing the ground to sink in both the El Potosi
and La Sandia valleys. Burning episodes have been intermit-
tent, with wet and dry periods (Valdés González, ;
Amezcua Torres, ).
Captivity and extinction
One of the first attempts to protect the Catarina pupfish was
made by Salvador Contreras-Balderas, who in  moved nu-
merous individuals to other springs in the area to reduce the
pressure exerted by the largemouth bass (Contreras-Balderas
& Lozano-Vilano, a). One year later, a small population
of M. aporus was identified in a small spring in the area. In
 Armando J. Contreras-Balderas and his team eradicated
the largemouth bass, removing .  individuals from the
spring (Contreras-Balderas & Lozano-Vilano, a). In the
following years, the rapid degradation of the habitat as a result
of water extraction increased the need to maintain the species
in captivity to avoid extinction. Since  the Catarina pup-
fish remained in captivity in a management unit specifically
for the conservation of the species.
In the early s the New York Aquarium and
Universidad Autonoma de Nuevo León established a pro-
gramme (Emerging rescue of Mexican fish species in immi-
nent danger of extinction) to protect the most representative
and threatened freshwater fishes of Mexico. The effort was
also joined by the Children’s Aquarium at Fair Park, Dallas,
Texas. The aims of the programme were to sustain stocks of
species over the long term, to maintain sufficient individuals
to repopulate native habitats, and to exchange specimens to
ensure the diversity of the genetic pools, all by recruiting
museums and public aquariums with sufficient space and
technical and economic resources.
Individuals of the Catarina pupfish were maintained in
various places, including San Luis Potosi in Mexico,
Denver and Arkansas in the USA, Zaragoza in Spain, and
Germany. However, the species was particularly sensitive
to environmental conditions and prone to infections. In
 most individuals of the captive populations succumbed
to Mycobacteria infections and those that remained were too
weak or sterile.
In  the Children’s Aquarium at Fair Park, Dallas,
Texas, held the last surviving population, with only  indi-
viduals (Liu & Echelle, ). The last two males were used
in an attempt to save the species through hybridization and
TABLE 2 Details of expeditions to the El Potosi spring in Nuevo León, Mexico (Fig. ), the only known habitat of the Catarina pupfish
Megupsilon aporus (Contreras-Balderas, ; Rodríguez-Almaraz & Campos, ; Contreras-Balderas & Lozano-Vilano, a).
Date Lead scientists Comments
Feb. 1961 R.R. Miller & H.L. Huddle Specimen of Megupsilon aporus found
Feb. 1968 V. Walters & J. Bleck 510 individuals of M. aporus collected
Mar. 1968 R.R. Miller & H.L. Huddle Holotypes of M. aporus collected
June 1968 V. Walters & B.J. Turner 151 individuals of M. aporus collected
1968 S. Contreras-Balderas & M.L. Lozano-Vilano Circa 6,000 individuals of M. aporus reported
July 1972 V. Walters, R.E. Brown Jr., R. Haas, R.K. Liu &
S.H. Walters
High abundance of M. aporus reported
1974 S. Contreras-Balderas Collection of largemouth bass Micropterus salmoides, reported as
common species
1974 S. Contreras-Balderas Translocation of individuals of M. aporus to adjacent springs
without largemouth bass
Late 1970s & early
1980s
G.A. Rodriguez-Almaraz & E. Campos Contraction of the spring as a result of intensified groundwater
pumping
Early 1990s S. Contreras-Balderas Overexploitation of water for crop irrigation
1994 S. Contreras-Balderas M. aporus considered extinct in the wild
1995 S. Contreras-Balderas Desiccation of El Potosi spring
Extinction of the Catarina pupfish 157
Oryx, 2020, 54(2), 154–160 © 2018 Fauna & Flora International doi:10.1017/S003060531800056X
https://doi.org/10.1017/S003060531800056X Published online by Cambridge University Press
backcross with a female of C. alvarezi. The reproduction was
successful, yielding more than  newborn individuals;
however, all of them were females with mycobacteriosis,
and all eventually died.
Lessons learned
The extinction of the Catarina pupfish has implications at
various scales. Megupsilon aporus was a monotypic genus
that diverged from Cyprinodon c.  million years ago ac-
cording to molecular analyses (Echelle et al., ). The
loss of this species precludes any opportunity to study its
unique evolutionary history and to understand the adaptive
processes by which it was able to survive as a relic for thou-
sands of years. Its extinction, as suggested by Burkhead
() for freshwater fishes in general, is evidence of a
much larger problem: the current loss of freshwater
biodiversity.
Freshwater fishes are being lost at a faster rate than ter-
restrial species. Jelks et al. () reported  imperilled
freshwater fishes in North America; of the  species cate-
gorized as Endangered,  are endemic to Mexico (Jelks et al.
; Burkhead, ). In the th century Mexico has lost 
species,  of them endemic (IUCN, ; Ceballos et al.,
a,b; Table ). The extinction of these species is attribu-
ted to two main causes: habitat degradation and pollution.
Habitat degradation by desiccation of water bodies affected
species that inhabited springs in arid and semi-arid environ-
ments, which are under water stress as a result of low pre-
cipitation and a high demand for water for human activities
(De la Vega, ). Species that were affected by pollution
lived in environments close to large cities or to industries
that discharge pollutants to the water without regulation
or previous treatment (Alcocer, ). The species that
became extinct were vulnerable, microendemic species
whose life histories were adapted to isolated environments
and particular conditions. However, the increasing pressure
on freshwater resources may cause a generalized extinction
trend, affecting even widely distributed species.
Concern for Mexican freshwater fishes has led to an in-
crease in knowledge about this group and the habitats on
which they depend. For instance, in  a national-level
analysis of the gaps in the conservation of aquatic biodiver-
sity in Mexico was published (Aguilar et al., ). This ef-
fort, which involved more than  specialists, resulted in
the identification of priority sites and their representative-
ness in the national system of protected areas. Although
the results indicated that only .% of the area covered by
priority sites is currently protected, it was a first step to in-
crease action focused on the conservation, management and
restoration of aquatic systems in Mexico.
In  Mexico included  freshwater fishes as part of the
Alliance for Zero Extinction, an international initiative to
safeguard places with microendemic species (AZE, ).
Local efforts to protect the species and their habitats have
increased awareness among the population. For instance,
the designation of the RAMSAR site Manantiales geoter-
males de Julimes, in , was supported by the presence of
the Julimes pupfish Cyprinodon julimes. This killifish was
described in  and its distribution is limited to El
Pandeño hot spring in Chihuahua, Mexico (De la
Maza-Benignos & Vela-Valladares, ). The local commu-
nity, together with non-profit organizations, researchers and
the local government have developed a conservation strategy
for the area, which includes the establishment of a state park
(Blando-Navarrete et al., ; De la Maza-Benignos, ).
Research conducted by Mexican academic institutions,
sometimes in collaboration with international partners,
TABLE 3 Freshwater fish species endemic to Mexico or Mexico and the USA that are now extinct, with former geographical location, and
causes of extinction (Burkhead, ; Ceballos et al., b).
Species Distribution Geographical location Cause of extinction (estimated year)
Atherinella callida Mexico Rio Tonto drainage, Veracruz Pollution (1957)
Chirostoma bartoni Mexico Crater lake at Valle de Santiago, Guanajuato Desiccation (2006)
Chirostoma charari Mexico La Mintzita spring, Morelia Habitat degradation (1957)
Evarra bustamantei Mexico Xochimilco, Mexico City Habitat degradation; pollution (1983)
Evarra eigenmanni Mexico Chalco/Xochimilco, Mexico City Habitat degradation; pollution (1983)
Evarra tlahuacensis Mexico Chalco, Mexico City Habitat degradation; pollution (1983)
Notropis aulidion Mexico Tunal River, Durango Invasive species (1965)
Notropis orca North America Rio Grande, USA/Mexico Invasive species (1975)
Notropis saladonis Mexico Salado River, Nuevo León, Coahuila Unresolved (1992)
Stypodon signifer Mexico Spring, Parras Coahuila Desiccation (1930)
Cyprinodon ceciliae Mexico La Presa Spring, Nuevo León Desiccation (1991)
Cyprinodon inmemoriam Mexico Ojo la Trinidad, Nuevo León Desiccation (1986)
Cyprinodon latifasciatus Mexico Parras, Coahuila Pollution (1930)
Megupsilon aporus Mexico Spring, El Potosi, Nuevo León Desiccation/invasive species (2014)
Characodon garmani Mexico Spring, Parras Coahuila Desiccation/pollution (1900)
Priapella bonita Mexico El Refugio, Veracruz Pollution (1906)
158 A. Valdés González et al.
Oryx, 2020, 54(2), 154–160 © 2018 Fauna & Flora International doi:10.1017/S003060531800056X
https://doi.org/10.1017/S003060531800056X Published online by Cambridge University Press
has increased the ex situ conservation efforts for imperilled
freshwater fishes. Universidad Michoacana de San Nicolas
de Hidalgo and Universidad Autonoma de Nuevo León
have led the efforts, with more than  species kept in cap-
tivity (Lascuráin et al., ). In particular, the golden skiffia
Skiffia francesae and tequila splitfin Zoogoneticus tequila are
examples of species that otherwise would be extinct, as they
no longer exist in the wild (Lascuráin et al., ).
There is still an urgent need to implement programmes
focused on the maintenance of freshwater systems. Lack of
regulation and enforcement are threatening both freshwater
fishes and water provision. The extinction of the Catarina
pupfish is a reminder of the vulnerability of aquatic systems.
There is a need to improve ecosystem management strate-
gies and the policies related to freshwater resources, and
the development of a national strategy for the conservation
of freshwater fishes should be a priority. Such a strategy
should include reintroduction of species extinct in the
wild, securing populations of the most threatened species
both in captivity and in the wild, and reduction of threats.
This strategy would bring together scientists and practi-
tioners to identify species and priority sites for conservation,
design a monitoring system to assess the current state of the
populations, improve watershed management practices, and
increase the impact of ex situ and in situ conservation ac-
tions to maintain species in the long term. A concurrent citi-
zen science programme in which local communities would
play a main role in the protection and monitoring of the
habitats could have a positive impact, with relatively low
investment costs. There is still time to avert further
extinctions of fish species in Mexico, but the window of
opportunity is closing. The next  decades will be critical
for most species at risk.
Acknowledgements We thank the Instituto de Ecologia,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, for support, and
Rosalba Becerra for preparing the figure.
Author contributions Conceptualization: GC; compilation of infor-
mation on the Catarina pupfish: AVG, MEAV, LME; writing: LME, GC.
Conflicts of interest None.
Ethical standards This research complied with the Oryx Code of
Conduct for authors.
References
A G U I L A R , V., A L A R C Ó N , J., G O N Z Á L E Z , L., K O L B , M., K O L E F F , P. &
U R Q U I Z A -H A A S , T. () Vacíos y omisiones en conservación de la
biodiversidad acuática epicontinental de México ríos, cuerpos de
agua y humedales. CONABIO, CONANP, Ciudad de México,
México.
A L C O C E R , J. () El agua epicontinental de México. Ciencia,
July–September, –.
A M E Z C U A T O R R E S , N. () Caracterización de materia orgánica
sedimentaria lacustre: un ejemplo del paleolago El Potosí, Nuevo
León, México. Revista Geociencia, , –.
AZE (A L L I A N C E FO R Z E RO E X T I N C T I O N ) () Http://www.
zeroextinction.org [accessed  July ].
B E N N E T T , M.G. & C O N WAY , K.W. () An overview of North
America’s diminutive freshwater fish fauna. Ichthyological
Exploration of Freshwaters, , –.
B L A N D O -N AVA R R E T E , J.L., J I M É N E Z -G O N Z Á L E Z , J., V A L E N C I A -
C A S T R O , C.M., C A S TA Ñ E D A -G AY T Á N , G. & C A R R I L LO -F LO R E S , R.
() Estudio técnico justificativo para declarar Parque Estatal El
Pandeño de los Pando, en el Municipio de Julimes Chihuahua.
Biodesert A.C., World Wildlife Fund, Universidad Juárez del estado
de Durango, Universidad Autónoma Chapingo, México.
B U R K H E A D , N.M. () Extinction rates in North American
freshwater fishes, –. BioScience, , –.
C A R A B I A S , J. & L A N D A , R. () Agua, medio ambiente y sociedad.
Hacia la gestión integral de los recursos hídricos en México. UNAM,
El Colegio de México, Fundación Gonzalo Río Arronte, Ciudad de
México, México.
C E B A L LO S , G., E H R L I C H , P.R., B A R N O S K Y , A.D., G A R C Í A , A.,
P R I N G L E , R.M. & P A L M E R , T.M. () Accelerated modern
human-induced species losses: entering the sixth mass extinction.
Science Advances, , e.
C E B A L LO S , G., E H R L I C H , P.R. & D I R Z O , R. (a) Biological
annihilation via the ongoing sixth mass extinction signaled by
vertebrate population losses and declines. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, ,
E–E.
C E B A L LO S , G., D Í A Z -P A R D O , E., M A R T Í N E Z -E S T É V E Z , L. & E S P I N O S A
P É R E Z , H. (b) Peces dulceacuícolas de México en peligro de
extinción. Fondo de Cultura Económica, Ciudad de México, México.
CONAGUA (C O M I S Í O N N AC I O N A L D E L A G U A ) () Informe
Estadísticas del agua en México. Http://www.conagua.gob.mx/
CONAGUA/Publicaciones/Publicaciones/SGP---EAM.
pdf [accesed  March ].
C O N T R E R A S -B A L D E R A S , S. () Conservation of Mexican fresh water
fishes: some protected sites and species, and recent federal
legislation. In Battle Against Extinction. Native Fish Management in
the American West (eds W.L. Minckley & J.E. Deacon), pp. –.
The University of Arizona Press, Arizona, USA.
C O N T R E R A S -B A L D E R A S , S. & L O Z A N O -V I L A N O , M.L. () Water,
endangered fishes, and development perspectives in north-eastern
Mexico. Conservation Biology, , –.
C O N T R E R A S -B A L D E R A S , S. & L O Z A N O -V I L A N O , M.L. (a) Survival
status of the Sandia and Potosi Valleys endemic pupfishes and
crayfishes from the Mexican plateau in Nuevo León, Mexico, with
comments on extinct snails. Proceedings of the Desert Fishes Council,
Volume XXVII,  Annual Symposium, .
C O N T R E R A S -B A L D E R A S , S. & L O Z A N O -V I L A N O , M.L. (b)
Extinction of most Sandia and Potosí valleys (Nuevo León, México)
endemic pupfishes, crayfishes and snails. Ichthyological Exploration
of Freshwaters, , –.
C O N T R E R A S -B A L D E R A S , S., A L M A D A -V I L L E L A , P., L O Z A N O -V I L A N O ,
M.L. & G A R C Í A -R A M Í R E Z , M.E. () Freshwater fish at risk or
extinct in México. A checklist and review. Reviews in Fish Biology
and Fisheries, , –.
C O N T R E R A S -M AC B E AT H , T., B R I TO R O D R Í G U E Z , M., S O R A N I , V.,
G O L D S P I N K , C. & M C G R E G O R R E I D , G. () Richness and
endemism of the freshwater fishes of Mexico. Journal of Threatened
Taxa, , –.
D E L A M A Z A -B E N I G N O S , M. (ed.) () Los Peces del Río Conchos.
Alianza WWF – FGRA y Gobierno del Estado de Chihuahua,
Chihuahua, México.
Extinction of the Catarina pupfish 159
Oryx, 2020, 54(2), 154–160 © 2018 Fauna & Flora International doi:10.1017/S003060531800056X
https://doi.org/10.1017/S003060531800056X Published online by Cambridge University Press
D E L A M A Z A -B E N I G N O S , M. & V E L A -V A L L A D A R E S , L. ()
Cyprinodon julimes sp. nov. In Los Peces del Río Conchos (ed. M. De
la Maza-Benignos), pp. –. Alianza WWF-FGRA y
Gobierno del Estado de Chihuahua, Chihuahua, Mexico.
D E L A V E G A , M.Y. () Situación de los peces dulceacuícolas de
México. Ciencias, , –.
D I R Z O , R., Y O U N G , H.S., G A L E T T I , M., C E B A L LO S , G., I S A AC , N.J. &
C O L L E N , B. () Defaunation in the Anthropocene. Science, ,
–.
D O M Í N G U E Z -D O M Í N G U E Z , O., B O TO , L., A L D A , F., P É R E Z -P O N C E D E
L E Ó N , G. & D O A D R I O , I. () Human impacts on drainages of the
Mesa Central, Mexico, and its genetic effects on an endangered fish,
Zoogoneticus quitzeoensis. Conservation Biology, , –.
D U D G E O N , D., A R T H I N G TO N , A.H., G E S S N E R , M.O., K AWA B ATA ,
Z.-I., K N O W L E R , D.J., L É V Ê Q U E , C. et al. () Freshwater
biodiversity: importance, threats, status and conservation
challenges. Biological Reviews, , –.
E C H E L L E , A.A., C A R S O N , E.W., E C H E L L E , A.F., V A N D E N B U S S C H E ,
R.A., D O W L I N G , T.E. & M E Y E R , A. () Historical biogeography
of the New-World pupfish genus Cyprinodon (Teleostei:
Cyprinodontidae). Copeia, , –.
G U Z M Á N -C E D I L LO , L.M.P. () Aspectos biológicos de dos peces
Cyprinodontidos y un crustáceo Cambaridae de Potosí, N.L. BSc
thesis. Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León (Facultad de Ciencias
Biológicas), Nuevo León, México.
IUCN () IUCN Red List Categories and Criteria (Version .).
Http://www.iucnredlist.org/ [accessed  March ].
J E L K S , H., W A L S H , S.J., B U R K H E A D , N.M., C O N T R E R A S -B A L D E R A S , S.,
D Í A Z -P A R D O , E., H E N D R I C K S O N , D.A. et al. () Conservation
status of imperiled North American freshwater and diadromous
fishes. Fisheries, , –.
L A S C U R Á I N , M., L I S T , R., B A R R A Z A , L., D Í A Z P A R D O , E., G U A L S I L L ,
F., M A U N D E R , M. et al. () Conservación de especies ex situ. In
Capital natural de México, vol. II: Estado de conservación y
tendencias de cambio, pp. –. CONABIO, Ciudad de México,
Mexico.
L I U , R.K. & E C H E L L E , A.A. () Behavior of the Catarina pupfish
(Cyprinodontidae: Megupsilon aporus), a severely imperiled species.
The Southwestern Naturalist, , –.
M I L L E R , R.R. () A new genus and species of cyprinodontid fish
from San Luis Potosi, Mexico, with remarks on the subfamily
Cyprinodontinae. Occasional Papers of the Museum of Zoology,
University of Michigan, , –.
M I L L E R , R.R. & W A LT E R S , N. () A new genus of cyprinodontid
fish from Nuevo León, Mexico. Contributions in Science of the
Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County, , –.
M I L L E R , R.R., W I L L I A M S , J.D. & W I L L I A M S , J.E. () Extinctions
of North American fishes during the past century. Fisheries, , –.
M I L L E R , R.R., M I N C K L E Y , W.L. & N O R R I S , S.M. () Freshwater
Fishes of Mexico. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, USA.
M Y E R S , R.A. & W O R M , B. () Extinction, survival or recovery of
large predatory fishes. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society of London B: Biological Sciences, , –.
O L D E N , J.D., H O G A N , Z.S. & Z A N D E N , M. () Small fish, big fish,
red fish, blue fish: size‐biased extinction risk of the world’s
freshwater and marine fishes. Global Ecology and Biogeography, ,
–.
R É G N I E R , C., A C H A Z , G., L A M B E R T , A., C O W I E , R., B O U C H E T , P. &
F O N TA I N E , B. () Mass extinction in poorly known taxa.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America, , –.
R I C C I A R D I , A. & R A S M U S S E N , J.B. () Extinction rates of North
American freshwater fauna. Conservation Biology, , –.
R O D R Í G U E Z -A L M A R A Z , G.A. & C A M P O S , E. () Distribution and
status of the crayfishes (Cambaridae) of Nuevo León, Mexico.
Journal of Crustacean Biology, , –.
S I L K , N. & C I R U N A , K. (eds) () A Practitioner’s Guide to
Freshwater Biodiversity Conservation. Island Press, Washington,
DC, USA.
S T I A S S N Y , M. & B I A N C O , P.G. () The medium is the message.
Biodiversity freshwater diversity in peril. In The Living Planet in
Crisis: Biodiversity Science and Policy (eds J. Cracaft & F. Grifo),
pp. –. Columbia University Press, New York, USA.
T V E T E R A A S , A. () Mexikanische Killifische am Rande der
Ausrottung. Datz Aquarien Terrarien, , –.
U Y E N O , T. & M I L L E R , R.R. () Multiple sex chromosomes in a
Mexican cyprinodontid fish. Nature, , –.
V A L D É S G O N Z Á L E Z , A. () Influencia de la calidad del hábitat y el
alimento sobre la viabilidad y aptitud ecológica de dos especies del
género Cyprinodon, C. veronicae y C. longidorsalis (Lozano y
Contreras ) del sur de Nuevo León, México. PhD thesis.
Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, Nuevo León, Mexico